Humans are not as good as computers in remembering a whole bunch of IP addresses for their favourite site. This led to the invention
of DNS that can map the IP address to a specific hostname or domain name.
This again led to a whole bunch of security issues.

DNS can have two types of security issues:
1. On the grounds of how DNS works (attackers use the protocols)
2. On the grounds of DNS having weak s/w, services, vulnerabilities in the server hosting DNS itself.

How DNS works first of all?

www.mail.yahoo.com (lets say client is looking for server1)

starts with .com(Root Zone - which has info on .com based servers - basically a directory service maintained by VeriSign Corp.) 
and walks down the tree.

It bumps in to different domains where yahoo.com is one of them and asks for how to go to mail.yahoo.com (second level)

meets a node with web.yahoo.com or mail.yahoo.com and moves down further to mail server (third level)

which will have server1.mail.yahoo.com or server2.mail.yahoo.com and finds the server 1

Authoritative Name server will actually have the Name-IP mapping but the search from the client's DNS will start and walk down 
iteratively and recursively until it reaches the Authoritative Name Server.

When a DNS query is made to a DNS server, it it has the information in the cache it will provide it to the caller but if it doesn't then it
will simply provide a referral indicating the DNS server that might know about the requested Name-IP mapping.

DNS Protocol Attacks

DNS Cache poisoning - where the cache is poisoned with the wrong information about the name-IP mapping thus all client's requests will be
made to point to the attacker's IP when a specific domain is requested.

DNS Spoofing - Attacker will make the domain lookup response appear as though its coming from the correct DNS service but actually it would
be framed and sent by the attacker himself.

DNS ID Hacking - This needs to be done for the DNS spoofing to take place.

DNS Server attacks
1. Exploiting vuln in the DNS server itself (something like Buffer OverFlow etc.)
2. DDoS - Smurf Attack (pointing the source IP to victim IP and sending a lot of ICMP packets )

DNSSEC
(Domain Name System Security Extension)
Signing of Root is necessary to prevent DNS attacks . Root signs the rest of the servers all the way down the hierarchy.
Signing of Root will provide authentication of the root to the client that is trying to connect with the DNS.

What if the signing key is compromised?
So DNSSEC uses KSK (key signing Key) a long term key and ZSK (Zone Signing Key) which is a short term key.






